I’m going to go back many decades ago
—Monday, March 6, 1972.
Now, some of you in the class weren’t alive.
I think I know of one for sure who was alive.
That’s an inside joke, not Inside Story
—but anyway.
And along with my wife,
we had the privilege
(and that was rare
unless you were a Bethelite)
to attend the graduation
of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
That was the 52nd class.
So we’re in the Assembly Hall
(jam packed there in New York City)
and just enjoying it.
What a privilege for us to sit there
and enjoy that program of the 52nd class!
Now here we are almost 100
(just two shy) classes later
—the 150th class.
And now we’re grateful
because many are tied in live as we speak.
But then the rest of the brotherhood
is going to have it available
in a few months.
So boy, things have changed,
and they enjoy that privilege.
But that was a rare privilege.
And I remember
Brother Knorr was the chairman
of the program.
And certainly, he just loved Gilead.
I mean, that you’ve got to give him.
Of course, Jehovah used him mightily
to get it all started there
—1943 was the first one.
But knowing that the beast was coming out,
Jehovah blessed them and said,
‘Yeah, we need a missionary school.’
There was a missionary school for years.
But anyway, the thing I wanted to mention
is that I remember an outstanding talk.
I had heard Brother Fred Franz
the summer before
at the Yankee Stadium convention,
but we were a little closer there
in the Assembly Hall.
And I’ll tell you what;
I was just glued to him.
If you had the privilege to hear him,
Jehovah blessed—
He had a blessed, beautiful mind.
He could just quote these scriptures.
And I’ve told folks:
“Now, if you don’t pay attention
and stay with him,
“you’re going to get lost.
He’s going to lose you.”
But if you paid attention,
it was thrilling
just to hear him pour out his heart
because it was all written
on his figurative heart.
But he discussed Ecclesiastes 5.
That’s why I was thinking
of bringing it up for your class here.
Because this is really directed to you.
And he spoke there about vows.
In those first seven verses,
dreams are mentioned.
And I appreciate it because it just struck me
when he mentioned it.
The dreams don’t refer to dreams
one has while they’re sleeping
because of the busy day.
Now, you can’t get that on your own
by just reading Ecclesiastes
with whatever version you have.
It had to do with getting sidetracked
with personal pursuits.
These dreams
—these are the things they’re doing.
And that would be “vanity”
(as we’d said then).
So let’s just take a moment
(you here in the class and others
who want to follow along in Ecclesiastes 5)
and just touch on some of the nice things.
And, of course, you could—
Now, don’t do it right now,
but you can do it later.
You have access to the Research Guide
—an in-depth understanding
of this wisdom in Ecclesiastes.
And Brother Franz addressed it.
For example, verse 1 says: “Watch your step.”
So this is for you soon-to-be graduates.
Jehovah is saying: “Watch your step.”
Don’t stop doing that.
You have thus far,
so continue to “watch your step.”
And he mentions those morally “stupid ones.”
That’s not you.
You can avoid that.
And then I love this in verse 2:
“Do not be quick with your mouth.”
Boy, there are a lot of people in the world
who could benefit from that counsel.
Isn’t that true?
It’s like:
‘Does he or she ever shut up?
‘I mean, they must—
I bet you they talk in their sleep.
They just won’t shut up.’
Then, anyway,
‘don’t be quick with your mouth,’
particularly in context here
when you’re speaking to Jehovah.
Boy, those are some good things
to keep in mind,
especially for you brothers
who will speak in public.
But you sisters too, when it’s personal
with your prayers to Jehovah,
don’t be quick with your mouth
when you approach
the Sovereign of the universe.
Your words should be few.
You do not impress God with vocabulary.
He’s impressed with sincerity of heart.
He loves those who love him.
And in all different languages,
he treasures those prayers.
And then he mentions this:
“A dream comes
from too many preoccupations.”
In the revised Bible here,
it says “too many cares.”
So this idea isn’t just dreams
from a busy, busy day.
This preoccupation with self
is being warned against here.
Don’t do it.
See, do not do it.
Don’t be preoccupied with yourself.
And for those who are,
there are many words from them.
But be careful, you know.
You have the privilege now;
you’ll be praying more in public
—probably more than you ever have before.
You get privileges, you know.
And when you’re praying to Jehovah,
sometimes—
We don’t want to be counseling
or criticizing prayers.
We try to be careful of that.
But sometimes you even hear
a prayer at Bethel, and it’s like:
‘OK. We’re trying to eat breakfast here.’
And I’ve told folks that it’s like,
you know, I just can’t help but—
Jesus is there, the most eloquent person
to walk the planet,
and the meal comes.
He ‘raised his eyes to heaven’
and “gave thanks.”
“Amen.
Let’s eat.”
I mean, there are other times
you want to pour out your heart and all that,
but you’re not praying to the audience.
You’re talking
to the Sovereign of the universe.
The counsel is, you know—
“Now I’m a Gilead graduate
(you brothers particularly),
so I’m going to have longer prayers.”
I hope not.
I sure hope not unless they’re private.
But then he gets into something crucial,
and it’s just so important
to keep in mind verse 4.
Let’s read verses 4 and 5:
“Whenever you make a vow to God,
“do not delay to pay it,
for he finds no pleasure
in the stupid ones [morally stupid].”
Then it’s very clear:
“What you vow, pay.”
And then:
“[It’s] better for you not to vow
than to vow and not pay.”
So this is serious counsel,
and the warning is,
Don’t allow your mouth to cause you to sin.
So when it comes to vows
(and some of you are married),
well, you have the vow.
You always have to hold on to that.
It’s not a light matter with Jehovah God.
And any other vows—be careful.
If you’re going to make a vow,
it’s between you and him.
But see, notice here:
“Do not allow [in verse 6]
your mouth to cause you to sin,
“and do not say before the angel
“[see, think about this]
that it was a mistake.”
So Jehovah has the angels
doing all sorts of things.
We don’t even begin to know the things
that are always going on all the time
with Jehovah’s servants and his holy angels.
It’s priceless.
But see, angels are, according to this,
assigned to check on these things.
So you don’t say to the angel:
“Why, look, I made a mistake.
Forgive me.”
Uh-uh.
You made a vow.
But see, it shouldn’t be
because an angel is going to check
that that’s Jehovah’s direction.
It should be
because of our love for Jehovah.
When you make a vow (you know,
whether it was marriage or whatever),
it’s your love for Jehovah
—that’s what cements the vow.
It matters.
See, it matters to him.
So then finally, in verse 7:
“For just as many preoccupations
lead to dreams,
so, too, many words lead to futility.”
So it’s good counsel.
You are so filled
with the Word of God.
This is a special class,
and Gilead is a special school.
We have other schools, SKE;
I’ll mention something later about that.
But this is unique
—to have men whom
Jehovah has appointed to instruct.
The Teaching Committee selects them
—totally whole-souled
and devoted to Jehovah God—
to teach you during the class.
And you’re going over all these things
in the Word of God.
And so it’s all in there,
and it’s just special.
So you thank Jehovah
that you have this education,
and you’re going
to move forward to glorify him.
And that’s pretty similar
to what is mentioned here
in the last sentence in verse 7:
“But fear the true God.”
So you soon-to-be graduates,
keep those words in your heart.
Just “fear the true God” in the days ahead,
and stay away from these kind of dreams
about self-preoccupation, you know?
Mm-mm.
No, not for you.
Otherwise, your education was futile,
not good.
And I don’t see that in any of you
(and I’m not implying).
But it’s such wise counsel
from Jehovah God in his Word.
So there’s much, much more there.
Enjoy thinking about it
with a little tool we have there,
the Research Guide.